tutorial/basic_services.rst, before:

-------------------------------------
Basic services (MariaDB and RabbitMQ)
-------------------------------------

``db-node``
-----------

OpenStack components use an SQL database and an AMQP-compatible
system to share the current status of the cloud and to communicate to
each other. Multiple SQL databases are supported, although the most
commonly used is MariaDB. Also multiple AMQP systems are supported, but
again, the most common used is RabbitMQ.

Since the architecture is higly distributed, a request done on
an API service (for instance, to start a virtual instance), will
trigger a series of tasks, possibly executed by different services on
different machines. Usually the status of the request is saved on the
database, and whenever some additional task is needed by a different
service, the AMQP system is used to request it.

MariaDB and RabbitMQ are therefore very important and very basic
services, used by all the OpenStack components. If something is not
working here, or not working properly, the whole cloud could be
unresponsive or broken.

SQL installation
----------------

We are going to install both MariaDB server and RabbitMQ on the same 
server, but on a production environment you may want to have them 
installed on different servers and/or in HA. The following instructions
are intended to be used for both scenarios.

.. QUESTION: What does it mean "the following instructions are
   intended to be used on both scnearios"? Which schenarios exactly?

Now please move on the db-node where we have to install the mariadb server.
In order to do that please execute::

    root@db-node # apt-get install -y mariadb-server

you will be prompted for a password, it is better to specify a *good*
one, since the MariaDB server will be accessible also via internet. You
can use the `pwgen` command to generate random passwords with
reasonable entropy.

For security reasons the MariaDB daemon listens on localhost only,
port 3306. This has to be changed in order to make the server
accessible from all the OpenStack services. Edit the
``/etc/mysql/my.cnf`` file and ensure that it contains the following
line::

    bind-address            = <IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE_VM> 

.. Of course, in this particular case the db-node is only accessible from
.. within the private, isolated network `openstack-priv`, so the security
.. needs are weaker and you could configure MariaDB to listen to
.. `0.0.0.0` instead.

This will make the MariaDB daemon listen only on the *private* interface. 

..   Not needed as we removed the public address.
     Please note that in this way you will not be able to
     contact it using the *public* interface (172.16.0.3), but this is
     usually what you want in a production environment.

The OpenStack official guide states that some of the options of InnoDB
storage engine must be set in the configuration file. In order to do
that add the following lines in the ``[mysqld]`` section of the
``/etc/mysql/my.cf`` file::

    [mysqld]
    # ...
    # This is already the default on MariaDB 5.5
    default-storage-engine = innodb
    innodb_file_per_table
    collation-server = utf8_general_ci
    init-connect = 'SET NAMES utf8'
    character-set-server = utf8

After changing this line you have to restart the MariaDB server::

    root@db-node # service mysql restart

By default MariaDB allows access also from the network. This is a
security risk, so you may want to disable it.

There is a script called ``mysql_secure_installation`` that helps you
modifying some of the defaults found in standard installations, we
would suggest you to run it before proceeding::

    root@db-node:~# mysql_secure_installation
    [...]
    Change the root password? [Y/n] n
    [...]
    Remove anonymous users? [Y/n] Y
    [...]
    Disallow root login remotely? [Y/n] Y
    [...]
    Remove test database and access to it? [Y/n] Y
    [...]
    Reload privilege tables now? [Y/n] Y
    [...]

..
   See `here <http://docs.openstack.org/icehouse/install-guide/install/apt/content/basics-database-controller.html>`_ for info on 
   TO-DO. 

Check that MariaDB is actually running and listening on all the interfaces
using the ``netstat`` command. 3306 is the port MariaDB listens to::

    root@db-node:~# netstat -nlp|grep 3306
    tcp        0     <IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE_VM>:3306            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      21926/mysqld    


RabbitMQ
--------

RabbitMQ is an implementation of the AMQP (Advanced Message Queuing
Protocol), a networking protocol that enables conforming client
applications to communicate with conforming messaging middleware
brokers.

Install RabbitMQ from the ubuntu repository::

    root@db-node:~# apt-get install -y rabbitmq-server
        
RabbitMQ does not need any specific configuration. On a production
environment, however, you might need to create a specific user for
OpenStack services. We are not covering in this tutorial, so please
refer to the `official documentation <http://www.rabbitmq.com/documentation.html>`_.

To check if the RabbitMQ server is running use the ``rabbitmqctl``
command::

    root@db-node:~# rabbitmqctl status
    Status of node 'rabbit@db-node' ...
    [{pid,22806},
     {running_applications,[{rabbit,"RabbitMQ","2.7.1"},
                            {mnesia,"MNESIA  CXC 138 12","4.5"},
                            {os_mon,"CPO  CXC 138 46","2.2.7"},
                            {sasl,"SASL  CXC 138 11","2.1.10"},
                            {stdlib,"ERTS  CXC 138 10","1.17.5"},
                            {kernel,"ERTS  CXC 138 10","2.14.5"}]},
     {os,{unix,linux}},
     {erlang_version,"Erlang R14B04 (erts-5.8.5) [source] [64-bit] [rq:1] [async-threads:30] [kernel-poll:true]\n"},
     {memory,[{total,24098760},
              {processes,9740136},
              {processes_used,9735768},
              {system,14358624},
              {atom,1124433},
              {atom_used,1120213},
              {binary,103368},
              {code,11134393},
              {ets,708784}]},
     {vm_memory_high_watermark,0.39999999980957235},
     {vm_memory_limit,840214118}]
    ...done.

Please keep the connection to the db-node open as we will need to
operate on it briefly.

The message broker uses guest as default user name and password. You
can change that password, or (better) create a completely new user:

You should create a different user `openstack` with::

    root@db-node:~# rabbitmqctl add_user openstack openstack 

and then grant write permissions to /::

    root@db-node:~# rabbitmqctl set_permissions -p / openstack '.*' '.*' '.*'
 
By default RabbitMQ listens on port 5672, on all the available interfaces::

    root@db-node:~# netstat -tnlp | grep 5672
    tcp6       0      0 :::5672                 :::*                    LISTEN      27903/beam      

In order to prevent this, create (or modify, if it's already there)
the file ``/etc/rabbitmq/rabbitmq-env.conf`` and add the following
line::

    NODE_IP_ADDRESS=<IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE_VM>

Whenever you update this file, restart the daemon::

    root@db-node:~# service rabbitmq-server restart

and check again::

    root@db-node:~# netstat -tnlp | grep 5672
    tcp        0      0 <IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE_VM>:5672           0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      28661/beam      

Now we will proceed with the other services, but since most of the
services need to create a MariaDB account and database, you probably
want to keep a shell opened on the `db-node`.

Commit message:

[basic_services.rst final small updates]

tutorial/basic_services.rst, after:

-------------------------------------
Basic services (MariaDB and RabbitMQ)
-------------------------------------

``db-node``
-----------

OpenStack components use an SQL database and an AMQP-compatible
system to share the current status of the cloud and to communicate to
each other. Multiple SQL databases are supported, although the most
commonly used is MariaDB. Also multiple AMQP systems are supported, but
again, the most common used is RabbitMQ.

Since the architecture is higly distributed, a request done on
an API service (for instance, to start a virtual instance), will
trigger a series of tasks, possibly executed by different services on
different machines. Usually the status of the request is saved on the
database, and whenever some additional task is needed by a different
service, the AMQP system is used to request it.

MariaDB and RabbitMQ are therefore very important and very basic
services, used by all the OpenStack components. If something is not
working here, or not working properly, the whole cloud could be
unresponsive or broken.

SQL installation
----------------

We are going to install both MariaDB server and RabbitMQ on the same 
server, but on a production environment you may want to have them 
installed on different servers and/or in HA. The following instructions
are intended to be used for both scenarios.

.. QUESTION: What does it mean "the following instructions are
   intended to be used on both scnearios"? Which schenarios exactly?

Now please move on the db-node where we have to install the mariadb server.
In order to do that please execute::

    root@db-node # apt-get install -y mariadb-server

you will be prompted for a password, it is better to specify a *good*
one, since the MariaDB server will be accessible also via internet. You
can use the `pwgen` command to generate random passwords with
reasonable entropy.

While configuring the various services in the next sections we used
``openstack`` as a password. For simplicity and to facilitate the 
debugging sessions you may also want to use that password. 

For security reasons the MariaDB daemon listens on localhost only,
port 3306. This has to be changed in order to make the server
accessible from all the OpenStack services. Edit the
``/etc/mysql/my.cnf`` file and ensure that it contains the following
line::

    bind-address            = <IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE> 

.. Of course, in this particular case the db-node is only accessible from
.. within the private, isolated network `openstack-priv`, so the security
.. needs are weaker and you could configure MariaDB to listen to
.. `0.0.0.0` instead.

This will make the MariaDB daemon listen only on the *private* interface. 

..   Not needed as we removed the public address.
     Please note that in this way you will not be able to
     contact it using the *public* interface (172.16.0.3), but this is
     usually what you want in a production environment.

The OpenStack official guide states that some of the options of InnoDB
storage engine must be set in the configuration file. In order to do
that add the following lines in the ``[mysqld]`` section of the
``/etc/mysql/my.cf`` file::

    [mysqld]
    # ...
    # This is already the default on MariaDB 5.5
    default-storage-engine = innodb
    innodb_file_per_table
    collation-server = utf8_general_ci
    init-connect = 'SET NAMES utf8'
    character-set-server = utf8

After changing this line you have to restart the MariaDB server::

    root@db-node # service mysql restart

By default MariaDB allows access also from the network. This is a
security risk, so you may want to disable it.

There is a script called ``mysql_secure_installation`` that helps you
modifying some of the defaults found in standard installations, we
would suggest you to run it before proceeding::

    root@db-node:~# mysql_secure_installation
    [...]
    Change the root password? [Y/n] n
    [...]
    Remove anonymous users? [Y/n] Y
    [...]
    Disallow root login remotely? [Y/n] Y
    [...]
    Remove test database and access to it? [Y/n] Y
    [...]
    Reload privilege tables now? [Y/n] Y
    [...]

..
   See `here <http://docs.openstack.org/icehouse/install-guide/install/apt/content/basics-database-controller.html>`_ for info on 
   TO-DO. 

Check that MariaDB is actually running and listening on all the interfaces
using the ``netstat`` command. 3306 is the port MariaDB listens to::

    root@db-node:~# netstat -nlp|grep 3306
    tcp        0     <IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE_VM>:3306            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      21926/mysqld    


RabbitMQ
--------

RabbitMQ is an implementation of the AMQP (Advanced Message Queuing
Protocol), a networking protocol that enables conforming client
applications to communicate with conforming messaging middleware
brokers.

Install RabbitMQ from the ubuntu repository::

    root@db-node:~# apt-get install -y rabbitmq-server
        
RabbitMQ does not need any specific configuration. On a production
environment, however, you might need to create a specific user for
OpenStack services. We are not covering in this tutorial, so please
refer to the `official documentation <http://www.rabbitmq.com/documentation.html>`_.

To check if the RabbitMQ server is running use the ``rabbitmqctl``
command::

    root@db-node:~# rabbitmqctl status
    Status of node 'rabbit@db-node' ...
    [{pid,22806},
     {running_applications,[{rabbit,"RabbitMQ","2.7.1"},
                            {mnesia,"MNESIA  CXC 138 12","4.5"},
                            {os_mon,"CPO  CXC 138 46","2.2.7"},
                            {sasl,"SASL  CXC 138 11","2.1.10"},
                            {stdlib,"ERTS  CXC 138 10","1.17.5"},
                            {kernel,"ERTS  CXC 138 10","2.14.5"}]},
     {os,{unix,linux}},
     {erlang_version,"Erlang R14B04 (erts-5.8.5) [source] [64-bit] [rq:1] [async-threads:30] [kernel-poll:true]\n"},
     {memory,[{total,24098760},
              {processes,9740136},
              {processes_used,9735768},
              {system,14358624},
              {atom,1124433},
              {atom_used,1120213},
              {binary,103368},
              {code,11134393},
              {ets,708784}]},
     {vm_memory_high_watermark,0.39999999980957235},
     {vm_memory_limit,840214118}]
    ...done.

Please keep the connection to the db-node open as we will need to
operate on it briefly.

The message broker uses guest as default user name and password. You
can change that password, or (better) create a completely new user:

You should create a different user `openstack` with::

    root@db-node:~# rabbitmqctl add_user openstack openstack 

and then grant write permissions to /::

    root@db-node:~# rabbitmqctl set_permissions -p / openstack '.*' '.*' '.*'
 
By default RabbitMQ listens on port 5672, on all the available interfaces::

    root@db-node:~# netstat -tnlp | grep 5672
    tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:25672           0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      6699/beam
    tcp6       0      0 :::5672                 :::*                    LISTEN      27903/beam      

In order to prevent this, create (or modify, if it's already there)
the file ``/etc/rabbitmq/rabbitmq-env.conf`` and add the following
line::

    NODE_IP_ADDRESS=<IP_OF_THE_DB_NODE_VM>

Whenever you update this file, restart the daemon::

    root@db-node:~# service rabbitmq-server restart

and check again::

    tcp        0      0 192.168.1.5:5672        0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      7495/beam       
    tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:25672           0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      7495/beam 

Now we will proceed with the other services, but since most of the
services need to create a MariaDB account and database, you probably
want to keep a shell opened on the `db-node`.
